---
title: Home
draft: true
---

After the Civil War, African Americans were free and had high expectations. However, they were thwarted by Jim Crow laws, the Ku Klux Klan, and other methods. By the beginning of the 20th century, African Americans realized that the South was not the best place for them, and the Great Migration began. Hundreds of thousands of African Americans moved North looking for better living standards and jobs. Around 175,000 descended on Manhattan, which has a mere area of 3 square miles, “giving the neighborhood the largest concentration of black people in the world” (“A New”).

Themes
F: The Harlem Renaissance, which lasted from about 1920 to the mid-1930’s, was a movement and cultural revival for African Americans in America centered in Harlem, New York.  
Many themes developed throughout this movement as African Americans ventured into new areas. Many works celebrated cultural heritage while others challenged stereotypes and promote integration. One challenge that African Americans faced was called two-ness. Two-ness was the fact that African Americans had two identities, one which was their African cultural heritage, and one which grew from their experiences in America. African Americans struggled to intertwine the two to form one. 

Video
Z: We also discovered a lot of information during our research that we were unable to include in our video.
Langston Hughes is one of the most famous authors of the Harlem Renaissance. He spent his whole life writing poems and published his first poem, “The Negro Speaks of Rivers” before he even went to college. Throughout the majority of his poems, he focused on the cultural identity of African Americans, displaying the hardships that African Americans dealt with daily, and advocated for equality. His poem I, Too was a cry for equality and arguing that the term American should not be limited by race. Let America be America Again argues that the American dream never existed for lower class Americans and African Americans. This theme is also seen in his poem Dream Deferred when he wonders, “What happens to a dream deferred? Does it dry up Like a raisin in the sun?... Or does it explode?” His decision to focus on the average life of African Americans and their hardships paid off as he was the first African American to live solely off of writing. 

P: The Harlem Renaissance was not just a writing movement, with African Americans making moves in music as well, lead by Louis Armstrong. Brought up in a poor family, Armstrong turned to music from a young age and mastered the cornet. Thanks to a friendship with King Oliver he was able to gain experience and popularity, and soon after joined the Fletcher Henderson orchestra. It was here that he began revolutionizing jazz music by using space dramatically, building solos up to a climax, and telling a story through his music. Many of his songs are still popular today, including What a Wonderful World and When the Saints. Armstrong even created vocals, despite the fact that his tone was raspy, unlike the singers of his time. Armstrong became popular to all types of Americans, and not just African Americans. However, he rarely politicized his race except during the Little Rock Crisis. He even made it to the upper classes of society, something unheard of for African American males.

M: The Harlem Renaissance even included artistic movements. Many of the artworks from this time clearly show themes that were also seen in the music and writing. Two of the most popular ones include The Judgement Day by Aaron Douglas and Looking Upward by James Lesesne Wells. Aaron Douglas’s piece consists of multiple colored silhouette figures and geometric shapes throughout the illustration, and a larger figure in the center of the page. The large figure in the middle is wearing wings and carries a trumpet and a key. The figure is an allusion to the angel Gabriel. While it may seem that the meaning of the artwork ends there, the  shapes on the left resemble lightning and the ones on the right resemble light, and this corresponds to the negative portrayal of the people on the left and the positive on the right. This can lead us to conclude that the men on the left are going to hell and the one on the right to heaven. 
